on april 5th 1975
a conference entitled the central
intelligence agency
and world peace was held in new haven
connecticut
on the campus of yale university from
the opening session of the conference
ernest de mayo talks about cia
involvement with international labor
focusing on chile mr dimeo is the
representative
from the world federation of trade
unions to the united nations
ernest demaio ladies and gentlemen
brothers and sisters
cia and fbi agents i think it would be
naive to assume
that a gathering such as this wasn't
under surveillance
it would be interesting to know how many
reports that the fbi has filed
were generated by the activities of the
cia
if we're to understand the cia we must
first take a look
at the socio-economic system that
spawned it our society is a social
and economic system based on the
exploitation of the many
by the few who own and control the
capital goods
which produce the nation's wealth and
the financial institutions that are its
lifeblood
the powerful few with their great
economic resources control the political
life of the nation
unless some of you here think that
ford is the president of this country
and is running it
they maintain a shadow government that
makes the basic decisions that are
relayed to the executive
and legislative branches of the overt
government
through henchmen placed in strategic
positions
throughout the federal apparatus
this is reflected in the interlocking
relationships between the major
financial
and industrial corporations with
government eisenhower called it the
military industrial complex
this is the major reason for corruption
in government
the purpose of government as conceived
by the founding fathers
was to promote the general welfare the
shadow government has prostituted this
into promoting the welfare of the
generals
general electric general dynamic and the
pentagon brass
[Applause]
over the years i'm a little conservative
over the years government has gotten
beyond the reach of the people
unable to influence the government
frustrated and alienated
the voters are avoiding the polls like a
plague
they have been the victims of
presidential lies and deception
and shades of imperial rome they have
seen the white house
put on the auction block creep
was nixon's bag man
if you don't know what creep was you
won't know what bagman is
it collected from the major corporations
for presidential favors at the expense
of the people
none of this went unnoticed or
unchallenged
over the years there were courageous men
and women in the universities the arts
and sciences
and the trade unions they spoke out
organized and held meetings such as this
their ranks were infiltrated by
government agents
paid informers who fingered the brave
and testified that they were subversive
agents
of a foreign power or something worse
part of a vague catch-all the communist
conspiracy
how many here recall that president
eisenhower was called a card-carrying
communist
and the supreme court the part of the
communist conspiracy
it all happened the mass media turned
the witch hunt into a roman circus
while lives and careers were destroyed
after over 40 years of surveillance and
investigations by the fbi
i can't get too excited about the fact
that the cia
also got into the act don't
misunderstand me
i'm not dismissing the cia i believe
that neither the cia
nor the fbi the irs the army or any
other agency of government
should do the dirty work of the
transnational corporations who run the
country
if we are to remain a free people
the tnc's as any yale undergraduate can
tell you
not only dominate the us scene but have
also extended their tentacles
throughout most of the world the most
important historical development in
recent years is the rise of the once
colonial nations which have cast off
their imperialist oppressors
they have established political
independence but in many of these new
nations the old
imperial masters still control the
economy
their raw materials utilities transport
and such industries they have are
controlled
by transnational corporations based
mainly in the united states
anyone familiar with the economic
history of south america its trade and
payment patterns
knows that the major u s corporations
have bled that continent white
our government fronting for these
corporations has used its military power
to keep it that way for years however
in this enlightened days the us
government doesn't
necessarily resort to naked military
power
military intervention occurs only after
other efforts have failed there are
other options
we train their military officers corrupt
them and then use them to overthrow the
governments their people have elected to
power
chile was something out of the ordinary
i went down there last year on the
commission of inquiry i don't intend to
go into lengthily
but there are a few things i do want to
say democracy was strongly entrenched in
chile and the military tolerated
civilian control
the chileans tried something new they
sought to achieve control of their
economic and political
destinies by peaceful means through the
electoral process
despite considerable cia interference
salvador allende at the head of a
marxist coalition
won a plurality of votes in a tight
three-way
election nothing the cia
and the copper trust did could keep
allende out of the presidency
this experiment in peaceful change was
aborted by the intervention
of the u s government the c i a was used
to destabilize
the allende regime is that a honey of a
word destabilize
the charter of economic rights and
duties of states
adopted by the united nations over u.s
objections
chapter 2 article 1 reads as follows
quote every state has the sovereign and
inalienable right
to choose its economic system as well as
its political
social and cultural systems in
accordance with the will of its people
without outside interference coercion or
threat
in any form whatsoever article two
section one states
quote every state has and shall freely
exercise
full permanent sovereignty including
possession
use and disposal over all its wealth
natural resources and economic
activities close quote
needless to say these principles did not
guide our government in chile
where the imperial might of u.s
transnational corporations to exploit
other peoples is involved
our government will do whatever has to
be done
to preserve that dubious right
the details of what the cia did or let
happen in chile
the assassination of the generals who
stood in the way
the bribing of others to carry out the
coup the slaughter arrests and torture
of thousands
will be told by others however there are
a few things i want to point out
after the coup all political parties
right
center and left were banned the congress
building in santiago now
is the national headquarters of the
military police
that's appropriate for for a military
state
all opposition newspapers have been
closed down the universities are run by
the military
the escudo during the latter days of the
allende regime exchanged at 500 to the
u.s dollar
on march 3rd 1975 the new york times
reported that the escudo had again been
devalued
to 2 900 to the dollar this
is an official devaluation for foreign
exchange purposes of 580
in 18 months when we think of the
distress
caused by 12 percent inflation in this
country last year
we can only guess at the mass misery
that
prevails on the conditions of almost
total
impoverishment in chile
a reliable yardstick to measure the
degree of democracy that exists in any
society
is the existence of trade unions which
effectively defend
and advance the interest of the and
welfare of the workers
and the people generally we now know
that the cia did some of its most
destructive work
in the chilean trade unions they
corrupted the leaders
and financed strikes against the allende
government
their objective was not to make a
political unions
under the aegis of the american
institute of free labor development a
feld
the infamous industry and cia finance
cio front for the building of class
collaborationist unions
in south america their purpose
aided abetted and financed by the cio
was to wreck
a friendly government the consequences
to the workers has been
unrelieved disaster the honest trade
union leaders have been arrested
tortured or murdered others have been
driven underground or into exile
union headquarters have been padlocked
the unions cannot function
the corrupt cia supported unionists who
struck against
allende are not leading strikes today
against far worse conditions
the hunter has tried to set up
a labor front with them without success
there have been several cia engineered
counter revolutions in latin america
but none have been as savage as the
chilean hunter
it seems that we are engaged in the
reprehensible business
of trying to drown revolutionary ideas
in blood
it hasn't worked in southeast asia it
didn't work in greece or portugal
it isn't working in spain and it won't
work in chile
what is happening in the world today is
not the dominoes falling
it is the growing resentment and
reactions of the peoples of the world
against
our transnational corporation-run
government
and i want to make a distinction between
our country
and our government the corrupt code of
sharp business practices
is a poor and unworkable substitute
for the high principles of the founding
fathers of our country
the chilean events have added a new debt
a new dimension to the age-old struggle
of peoples for political economic and
social emancipation
it has already lowered the tolerance
level
of acceptable opposition in the ongoing
struggle for the minds of the people
the immediate reaction in peru to the
chilean developments was to close down
the opposition press
in portugal the irresponsible ultra left
and right suspected of cia connections
have been restricted when the u.s
government failed to redeem its pledges
to aid in the restoration of north
vietnam
when it continued to aid the third
regime and its violations of the paris
agreements
when it continued its reactionary role
in cambodia
their revolutionary forces of southeast
asia responded
in what they believe from long and
bitter experience
is the only language the u.s government
understands
the demise of our client states is
predictable
what bothers me most is if we permit the
cia
and other agencies of our government to
effectively deny to other people
their democratic rights and aspirations
how long do we retain them for ourselves
when our government engages in economic
warfare
subsidizes the opposition press
organizes strikes disruption and mass
demonstrations
it is crippling the normal democratic
process and the economy of these
countries
it prevents the small adjustments and
policies and
application that resolves day-to-day
problems
and keeps them from becoming big
unwieldy and explosive
if we have contempt for the legal
process in other countries
can we maintain respect for the law here
ask richard nixon
watergate was bringing home to the
american people what our government
practices abroad
the shadow government is now conducting
an unannounced
subliminal campaign the general outline
is that democracy is slow and cumbersome
and it questions whether it can survive
the conditions
created by modern technology
it is further suggested that what is
required to meet the problems posed by
the current realities is an
authoritarian state
a euphemism for fascism and that is what
is usually meant
when you hear talk about we should
strengthen the presidency
to what point dictatorship
the only form of government that works
for the people is democracy
it is hardly necessary to recount the
transient glories
of mussolini's hitler italy mussolini's
italy hitler's
germany salazars portugal the colonels
greece and franco
spain the handwriting is there for all
to see
there is no future for fascism democracy
works but it has been a long
time since it has been effectively used
in this country democracy has been
shelved
what we have is the inefficient
government of by
and for the transnational corporations
they have used their power to impoverish
the people
swart union organization corrupt much of
it
they have lowered the living standards
of the people they have idled
production facilities and millions of
workers at a time when there are vast
unmet personal and social needs the
monopolies
have given us endless preparation for
war
they have drafted our youth to die and
brush fire wars to defend the vital
interests of the transnational
corporations
in their mad drive for maximum profits
they have created conditions that
not only reduce their profits but also
threaten the stability of their economic
and social system
when we go after the cia we are taking
on the strong arm agency of the power
structure
in this continuing endeavor we shall
have to control and curb the monopolies
and their transnational operations they
have the power of the government
we have the potential support of the
people
it is an unequal contest with history
and the people on our side we cannot
lose
in this disparate struggle the
monopolies have already lost the battle
for the minds of the people
this is why they resort to infiltration
entrapment disruption provocation
and terror no matter how real or
psychological the terror may be
they are the weapons of the defeated
they cannot win
we cannot lose it has been said that the
long journey begins with a single step
and that step has been taken a long time
ago
we make our contribution when we
dedicate ourselves to mobilize the
democratic forces of the people
together we can bring back to america
what lincoln talked about
government of by and for the people in
the lively pursuit of this
objective we shall establish the basic
prerequisite of enduring peace
thank you
in the second half of this program john
marks
discusses the clandestine mentality mr
marx is a former state department
intelligence officer
and co-author of the bestseller the cia
and the cult of intelligence john marks
[Applause]
i could give you a long laundry list of
some of the things
the cia has done around the world and i
mean it is fairly impressive i suppose
when you add it up over the years i mean
starting in the late 1940s trying to
organize resistance movements in places
like albania and poland and the ukraine
and
not getting too far and then finding
much more success in the third world
cia overthrowing a government in
guatemala in 1953
overthrowing the government of iran in
1954 and putting the shah back on the
throne so he could shake us down on the
oil prices a little later on
in 1958 the cia tries to overthrow the
government of
sucarno in indonesia and fails and
president of the united states
eisenhower i think it was lied openly
about that cia intervention
in 1961 the cia tries to overthrow the
government of castro and cuba at the bay
of pigs and fails very badly
uh not to be undoing it the cia
continues for 10 years after that
continuing guerrilla operations against
cuba
uh organizing at least half a dozen
assassination attempts
a few of which involve the mafia which
is an interesting combination when you
have the mafia and the cia and
you can get into some wonderful
arguments about which organization has
more honor
and i don't know where that would come
out but
but then you in chile they tried cia
tries to stop
allende in 58 elections in 64 elections
in the 1970 elections
finally fails and then has to overthrow
him in 1973
indochina continuing intervention from
the early 1950s into the present
something that's come back to haunt us
but i mean you could just go all over
the world you don't find a country in
the third world where the cia hasn't
intervened or one fashion or another
over the years
uh that we know that i mean that's
something that
probably everybody in this room learned
a little a few years ago and is trying
to perhaps do something about
so i just want to tell you two stories
the first one is a philip agee story
uh philip agee is a former cia operative
who now resides in england he's written
a book called inside the company
which is the most detailed account of
what the cia actually does in a
particular
country in the field a.g was in ecuador
in uruguay
and uruguay which as you all remember
was this the country of state of siege
is the country that interests me as far
as this story is concerned
aj was the cia's contact man with the
local police and intelligence services
uh he was the guy who recruited agents
in the uruguayan secret police
who slipped secret money to them helped
in their training
and whatever and at one point in the mid
1960s i believe the year was 1966
a.g was asked by the head of the
montevideo
police intelligence squad for the name
of a local communist leader
which aig through his own intelligence
sources was able to provide
a few days later agee was in the office
of this uruguayan police captain
and they were talking about the normal
business they talk you know we'll give
you money for this project we'll train
you in that project and whenever
and aj started to hear screams down the
hall
and aj knew what those screams were
because he'd been in this business for a
while and it was a man being tortured
down the hall
and a.g got this terrible realization
that perhaps the man that he had just
fingered to the uruguayan police was the
guy being tortured down the hall
but he didn't want to say anything and
he felt that you know if he said
something it might
hurt the delicate relations between the
cia and the montevideo police force
and the police captain was similarly
embarrassed and perhaps didn't want to
say anything
and he kept turning up the radio in the
room as the screams got louder the man
kept turning up the radio
louder and louder and louder until i
suppose when
everything got overwhelming they broke
off the meeting and aj did find out
later that the man being tortured down
the hall while the radio was turned up
was indeed a local communist who's a.g
as a representative the cia had fingered
to the local police force
so keep that story in mind i mean that's
a first-hand account of a cia operative
who was there
i mean for no one's challenged ages
facts a lot of people challenge his
politics and his motivations but no one
is challenging aj's facts even in the
cia
now i want to read to you a a couple of
pages from an interview and it's all
verbatim
that i had with a former cia operative
within the last two months
and this guy served in latin america and
he served in vietnam
and uh he talked to me very frankly
and i'm going to read this to you you
have to understand when i talk about
picks
that stands for provincial interrogation
centers
which were interrogation centers which
the cia built in every vietnamese
province
and paid for constructed they all had
similar designs they had rooms for
interrogation they had rooms with
you know jail rooms and things of that
sort but remember pix stands for
provincial interrogation center
okay i'm reading verbatim nothing of
this has changed except a few words
which i change so you can't pinpoint who
the guy is because it's a little bit
more specific
and this is the cia operative talking
and he says
but again i never personally thought in
terms of morality
i received a directive this is what was
to be accomplished and i was graded on
achieving objectives
get it done now if somebody made out an
assignment to kill somebody
i certainly would worry about the
morality of that but if i were working
against che guevara what the hell
he was whatever he was doing was totally
illegal so however i went about getting
him
if it was maybe putting an individual
into bolivia legally
a black entry into the country which is
the greater illegality
and i said to him that seems to be an
attitude that's rather common
that everything is for the greater good
and for the national security
he replies again i can't think of ever
setting out or even wanting somebody to
be hurt
maimed or killed there were legalities
but they were literally legalities
and if someone got hurt generally
speaking it would be when we didn't have
a pure controlled operation
and by that i mean if we were using the
police because these people
their mentality is different than ours
they're totally brutal
they used to publicize these picks over
in vietnam the provincial interrogation
centers
they were under our jurisdiction and
control and they drove me up a damn wall
spending half of my time going from pick
to pick and by god
i had those things neat and clean and
orderly and the next thing i'd find that
down in one province somebody had gotten
the hell beat out of it
that was never authorized or directed we
would raise all kinds of hell
and it was like talking to a stone wall
these people
meaning the vietnamese uh just have the
mentality where force and might makes
right
and they totally hate and dislike one
another and they're going to beat the
hell out of each other
the cia assumed an awful lot of blame
our only responsible
our only responsibility was to set up
set these up
and the purpose of them which never uh
which never provided anything that we
wanted theoretically
we had the functional jurisdiction then
we we did the funding and financing at
least
of course they were special they were
special branch operated
and we did have some power in the
special branch and we were supporting
and financing them
but the tortures oftentimes we wouldn't
even know about it
we'd hear about it because some
newspaper man was floating through the
area
and how in the name of god he'd find out
but we'd read it in the paper
or we'd get a cable in from saigon and
what the name of god is happening in
your damn pic now
and off we'd go we never as an agency
instigated either torture or violence
now there were times when we knew the
way certain policemen were
guatemalans are vicious and they'll
stand somebody up in a basement or put
them out in a cold freezing water
and so on and so forth then maybe the
brazilians use their electronic devices
and so forth
we know that we tell them not to
they say all right we're not going to do
it but we're also not going to
be prep but we're also not going to be
present during these interrogations
again because i don't like to see that
sort of thing
if i am there they're not going to do it
in all probability
and as i as soon as i leave they're
going to haul the guy back they'll tell
me
they'll tell me we talked to him for two
hours that's the main thing
and hell they'd keep them for 24 hours
we know this
we do try to get them to change their
techniques and procedures
but they're not going to change they
never have and they never will
and they know damn well that if they're
ever thrown out of power they're going
to undergo the same thing
because of the revenge motive and in
some of these countries
it's been working back and forth for a
hundred years and will always continue
to do so
but by the time it get pub by the time
it gets publicized
because the agency may be supporting
financing or even advising a given group
whatever that group does then their sins
come back to the agency
and it really isn't fair and that's how
most of us would look on it when we're
involved
well that's the clandestine mentality i
mean that's what we're talking about
here
we're talking about a complete
separation of personal morality
from the acts that these people commit
in the name of
our national security and our government
and that's the kind of people
that we're trying to get you know get
eliminated from positions of power and
positions of influence that's also the
kind of person
who is probably not going to tell the
truth to a senate committee
in fact william buckley i guess who was
with god in yale at man
man at yale before he got into the
national review and into the cia which
he was in
has written a column advising director
colby to lie to the senate committees
he says to protect the agency and the
national security
and that's the kind of folks we're
dealing with and that
it's not an easy thing to do i mean it's
not an easy thing to get to the bottom
of what these people have been doing
around the world and we're not talking
about people
who have a predilection to tell the
truth we are talking about people who
love their kids
who mow their lawns who if you sat down
with them in a bar they would probably
be fairly charming you would start
understanding their point of view i mean
they are human beings they are not
unquestioning automatons but they
completely separate their personal work
from any sense of personal morality and
that is an awfully important distinction
so i all i want to say is that perhaps
the time has come for the rest of us
who after all are paying the bills
through our tax dollars or partially
paying the bills for this kind of thing
to take on some of the responsibility
for these kinds of actions
which are being committed in our name
all over the world
i mean we can keep our radios up just so
loud and soon we may start hearing some
of those screams
and i think that the time has come to
eliminate the clandestine portion of the
central intelligence agency
to make the united states subject to at
least a minimum standard of
international law
and international responsibility i mean
people are going to argue
that while the soviets have a kgb isn't
this an effective weapon in an
international struggle
i would remind you that bacterial
warfare is a very effective
weapon in international struggles but
that the united states has decided for
reasons of our own
that that is perhaps below the minimal
standard of warfare that we're allowed
to use
and i would submit that the dirty tricks
and covert action
of the cia are also below that minimal
standard
and the sooner the united states gets
out of this business the better
[Applause]
for more information about the central
intelligence agency
contact center for national security
studies
122 maryland avenue northwest
washington dc 2002
this program was produced at radio
station wwuh
in west hartford connecticut